Migration Guides from Gatsby and NextJS to Astro (#2170)
withastro/docs: src/pages/en/guides/migration-guide/from-gatsby.md

---
title: Migrating from Gatsby
description: Tips for migrating an existing Gatsby project to Astro
layout: ~/layouts/CMSLayout.astro
stub: false
framework: Gatsby
---

Here are some tips for converting a Gatsby project to Astro. This is not a full, step-by-step walkthrough, but it will guide you through some changes you will have to make. 

> ## Key Similarities

Author: ```suggestion
## Key Similarities between Gatsby and Astro
```

> While we'll touch on the differences between Gatsby and Astro shortly, it's important to note the ways in which the two overlap.

Author: The following suggestion was originally written by @sarah11918:

```suggestion
Gatsby and Astro share some similarities that will help you migrate your project:
```

Not opposed to an introductory sentence here, but also not super convinced that we need one. (Good for SEO?) Also would consider `## Key Similarities between Gatsby and Astro` in case we think that is better heading/Algolia/SEO usage.

A little note: I'm less-inclined to narrate the structure of the page (e.g. tell them what's coming up). I think this page is already gonna be quite long, there's a TOC in the sidebar, and people will get from this heading that this section is `similarities` (which is why I also think we might not need any sentence at all? Esp if we put the two names in the heading).

Thoughts?

Author: Yeah, totally agree with you here @sarah11918 - the "narrate the structure" wasn't my favorite either. I was really struggling to throw this sentence together, but your edit works nicely.

I did want to keep an introductory sentence here to make the glanceability a bit nicer for the end user.

- The syntax of `.astro` files is similar to JSX. Writing Astro should feel familiar.

- Astro is component-based. Your markup structure will likely align closely before and after your migration.

- Astro has built-in support for Markdown and an integration for using MDX files. Both Gatsby and Astro use [Remark](https://remark.js.org/) by default for Markdown manipulation and pre-processing, so you can continue to use many of your existing Remark plugins.

- Astro also has [official integrations for using React components](/en/guides/integrations-guide/react/). Note that in Astro, React files **must** have a `.jsx` or `.tsx` extension.

- Astro projects can also be SSG or SSR. (Support for per-page rendering strategy is planned.)

- Astro has support for NPM package usage, including several for React. You may be able to keep some or all of your existing React components and dependencies.

## Key Differences

> Now that you understand the ways that Astro and Gatsby align, how do they diverge?

Author: The following suggestion was originally written by @sarah11918:

```suggestion
When you rebuild your Gatsby site in Astro, you will notice some important differences, especially in how your project data is queried and used to create your site.
```

rebuild? recreate? port? migrate? convert? I'm torn between intentionally using a new word that might bring us new hits, vs a word that maybe feels a bit more natural/appropriate in context? Thoughts?

Also, again here I'm not entirely convinced that any sentence is necessary (is having a preamble just a wordier way to say, "differences!") BUT if we do use it, I'm thinking maybe to make it useful, a nod to an actual key difference like the GraphQL data layer, and `createPates`? Again, open to thoughts here!

(Continued point: leaning away from self-narration of the page)

Author: I think any of the words you suggested here feel pretty appropriate. In addition to bringing us new potential SEO, it also helps break up the "monotony" of reading in-depth content to have our terminology shift a _little_ to mix things up.

As for pointing towards a key difference, I'm not sure I'm entirely sold simply because I feel like people might glance over this sentence and assume it's the _primary_ difference between Astro and Gatsby, despite there being a couple (which is the point of this section)

### React App vs MPA 

Gatsby is a React app, and uses `index.js` as your project's root. While Gatsby is able to generate an HTML page for each of the routes configured, it also re-initializes React for all of the content on-screen, including static portions.

Astro is a multi-page site, and `index.astro` is your home page. It generates HTML pages for each configured route but, in contrast to Gatsby, only initializes JavaScript on the interactive elements on-screen.

### Page routing

You don't need to know any domain-specific knowledge to link between different pages in Astro. Instead of Gatsby's custom `<Link to="/path">` component, use the HTML standard `<a href="/path">` tag.

> In addition, while Gatsby primarily uses the `createPages` function to create dynamic pages, [Astro opts for page-based routing](/en/core-concepts/routing/#dynamic-routes) that better represents the individual HTML files that are output in a build.

Author: Re-posting @sarah11918's comment about this point here:

I grok the middle point, but I think the wording needs some work. The points to me are:

- Gatsby needs `createPages` AT ALL  to... create any pages! Astro CAN create pages (non-dynamically) on  file-placement alone. Dynamic page routes are not in fact necessary  (although, totally possible!)
- `createPages` is like a config setup thing to create ALL your pages. Astro's `getStaticPaths` is right inside `src/pages/`, collocated with the set of pages you want to build dynamically. Maybe  that's the way in which Astro's dynamic page routing is "closer to the  platform of HTML"?

Is there any other nuance about that I'm not getting that should be represented? Can we keep working on the wording of point 2?

Author: We can definitely keep working on the wording of point 2, but there is a bit of nuance that might not be captured otherwise:

- [Gatsby _can_ use file-based routing without `createPages`](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/docs/reference/routing/file-system-route-api#collection-routes), but per their own admission:
    > If you want more control over the page creation you should use the `createPages` API.
- Gatsby is able to use `createPages` _alongside_ page-based file routing, they are not mutually exclusive.

Would love your thoughts on how we can improve the middle sentence without implying that the user _must_ utilize `createPages`.

> In addition, while Gatsby primarily uses the `createPages` function to create dynamic pages, [Astro opts for page-based routing](/en/core-concepts/routing/#dynamic-routes) that better represents the individual HTML files that are output in a build.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gatsby uses the `createPages` function to configure creating dynamic pages, whereas [Astro opts for page-based dynamic routing](/en/core-concepts/routing/#dynamic-routes). In Astro, both static pages and pages that generate multiple pages are located within `src/pages/` and share many similarities. 
```
So, what if we focus on the fact that `getStaticPaths()` *in a page file itself* creates pages, whereas Gatsby's page creation is kind of closer to a "config/setup" type thing? Would this be true? (Not sold on this wording; wondering whether this qualifies as an important diff to hit, and whether it's meaningful/helpful to point this out to those converting.)

> ### Page routing
> 
> Because of the differences between React apps and Astro MPA apps, you don't need to know any domain-specific knowledge to link between different pages. Instead of Gatsby's custom `<Link to="/path">` component, you'll use the HTML standard `<a href="/path">` tag.
> 
> In addition, while Gatsby primarily uses the `createPages` function to create dynamic pages, [Astro opts for page-based routing](/en/core-concepts/routing/#dynamic-routes) that better represents the individual HTML files that are output in a build.
> 
> Finally, should you need to access information about the current route within an Astro component, [you're able to use `Astro.url`](/en/reference/api-reference/#astrourl), which exposes a [web-standard `URL` class](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/URL).

Author: The following suggestion was originally written by @sarah11918:

```suggestion
### Page routing

You don't need to know any domain-specific knowledge to link between different pages in Astro. Instead of Gatsby's custom `<Link to="/path">` component, use the HTML standard `<a href="/path">` tag.

In addition, while Gatsby primarily uses the `createPages` function to create dynamic pages, [Astro opts for page-based routing](/en/core-concepts/routing/#dynamic-routes) that better represents the individual HTML files that are output in a build.

To access information about the current route, use [`Astro.url`](/en/reference/api-reference/#astrourl) to expose a [web-standard `URL` class](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/URL).
```

Fixed the links to make them relative inside the project, and made the first and third points a little more direct. (Use/ vs. you'll use; not annotating "additionally/finally")

I grok the middle point, but I think the wording needs some work. The points to me are:

- Gatsby needs `createPages` AT ALL to... create any pages! Astro CAN create pages (non-dynamically) on file-placement alone. Dynamic page routes are not in fact necessary (although, totally possible!)
- `createPages` is like a config setup thing to create ALL your pages. Astro's `getStaticPaths` is right inside `src/pages/`, collocated with the set of pages you want to build dynamically. Maybe that's the way in which Astro's dynamic page routing is "closer to the platform of HTML"?

Is there any other nuance about that I'm not getting that should be represented? Can we keep working on the wording of point 2?

You have access to every page `<head>` directly, so you can add font sources and stylesheets as needed in individual pages or layout components. Page routing for your blog posts based on GraphQL queries defined in `gatsby-node.js` is replaced with Astro's built-in, automatic file-based routing for files located within `src/pages/`.

Your Astro project will not use any of these `gatsby-*.js` files, but there may be some content that you can reuse:

- `gatsby-config.js`: Move your `siteMetadata: {}` into `src/data/siteMetadata.js` (or `siteMetadata.json`) to import data about your site (title, description, social accounts etc.) into page layouts.
- `gatsby-browser.js`: Consider adding anything used here directly into your main layout's `<head>` tag.
- `gatsby-node.js`: This file handles multiple server-side operations that have built-in support in Astro:
     - GraphQL node customization: You do not need to customize the schema in Astro, but viewing the Gatsby schema may help you with defining types in your Astro projects.

>      - Page creation: Astro supports both [async data loading](/en/reference/api-reference/#getstaticpaths) and [pagination](/en/core-concepts/routing/#pagination) right out of the box. You can cross-reference your `createPages` function to migrate the pages to Astro's methodologies.

Author: The following suggestion was originally written by @sarah11918:

```suggestion
     - Page creation: Any page file located within `src/pages/` will become a page route in Astro with no `createPages` function needed. However, for dynamic page generation, Astro supports both [async data loading](/en/reference/api-reference/#getstaticpaths) and [pagination](/en/core-concepts/routing/#pagination) right out of the box. You can cross-reference your `createPages` function to migrate to Astro's routing methods.
```

Would you say this is still accurate? I do think it's worth mentioning that you don't necessarily NEED to generate your pages dynamically.. like, at all!

```

#### Component-specific styling

One of Astro's unique capabilities enables you to use standard `<style>` tags for scoped CSS styles.

```astro
<p>Hello, world</p>

<!-- The following will only apply to this component -->
<style>
p {
   font-weight: bold;
}
</style>
```

However, you can extract your styling to a [CSS Module file](/en/guides/imports/#css-modules) and import that instead.

```astro title="src/components/Hello.astro"
---
import styles from './Hello.module.css';
---

<p>Hello, world</p>
```

 ```css title="src/components/Hello.module.css"
 p {
    font-weight: bold;
 }
 ```

#### Global Styling

Global styling is applied similarly between Gatsby and Astro by importing a `css` file within a layout file.

```astro title="src/layouts/Layout.astro" {2}
---
import "global.css";
---

<html>
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8" />
	<link rel="icon" type="image/svg+xml" href="/favicon.svg" />
	<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width" />
	<meta name="generator" content={Astro.generator} />
	<title>Astro</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <slot/>
  </body>
</html>
```

```css title="src/layouts/global.css"
p {
    font-weight: bold;
}
```

> #### CSS Preprocessors

Author: The following comment was originally written by @sarah11918:

Just calling out that this section doesn't feel very "Here's what to do to replicate your Gatsby setup in Astro."

Unless the example below is wildly different from how this is done in Gatsby, I'd consider just a sentence or two saying you CAN use them and so e.g. "You can use your existing setup" or a very quick explanation of what do DO when converting a site.

Astro supports installing and using many [CSS preprocessors](/en/guides/styling/#css-preprocessors).

As an example, to use Sass, you would run:

```shell
npm install -D sass
```

After doing so, you're then able to import `.scss` or `.sass` files as you would a `.css` file. Additionally, you're able to declare the CSS preprocessor used to modify `style` tags:

```astro title="src/layouts/Layout.astro"
<p>Hello, world</p>

<style lang="scss">
p {
   color: black;
   
   &:hover {
       color: red;
   }
}
</style>
```

### Gatsby Code Comments to Astro

> An Astro file uses JavaScript code comments in the frontmatter `//` but HTML code comments in the template body. (`<!-- -->`)

Author: The following suggestion was originally written by @sarah11918:

Should we include something like the code comment sample that's here? https://docs.astro.build/en/core-concepts/astro-components/#component-structure

![](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/5098874/207114678-176b886a-cb45-4f53-8f42-b95e62f59b80.png)
